

The incidence is even more pronounced in developing countries  where carcinoma of the cervix is the
most frequently diagnosed malignancy in females,  with the majority of the patients  presenting with
advanced disease. While surgery and radiotherapy (RT) are equally effective in early-stage disease,
radiation  therapy has been the primary treatment modality for stage III disease, with 5-year
survival rates between 30% to 45% being  reported.4-8 Attempts to improve these results, including
the use of hypoxic cell sensitizers, hyperbaric oxygen therapy,'0  and neutron therapy" have met
with limited or no success. 


MATERIALS AND METHODS.Patient Entry Criteria and Evaluation.Patients also needed to have adequate
medullary reserve (WBC Å½ 4,000/IpL, platelet count >  100,000/p.L) and normal renal (BUN < 8.9
mmol/L, creatinine < 130 Rimol/L, creatinine clearance > 1.17 mL/s) and liver  (alkaline phosphatase
< 110 U/L, bilirubin < 21 pimol/L) function. 


Three in the RT arm refused further  treatment after only a few fractions of irradiation were
delivered. 


The superior limit of the radiation field  was the L5-S1 junction, the lower limit wasthe caudal
pole of obturator foramen, and the lateral boundaries were 1.5 cm  beyond the lymph nodes as
demonstrated on lymphangiography. 


Mannitol 200 mg was administered IV beginning 15 minutes before the cisplatin  infusion. Potassium
chloride at 20 mEq/L and magnesium sulfate were added as needed. 


Six months after activation of the study, after nine patients had been treated with CT, the
bleomycin dose was reduced to 15  U IM every 12 hours from day 1 to day 3 (total dose, 90 U), and
after the first year, cisplatin administration was changed  from day 1 to day 4. 


All patients were observed to determine the efficiency of the combined therapy by comparing overall
survival, rate of local  control, incidence of distant metastases, and toxicity between treatment
regimens. 


Patients were stratified by  age (< 50 years v > 50 years), extensiveness of parametrial involvement
(unilateral v bilateral), and lymphangiogram nodal  findings (negative v positive). We planned to
accrue 60 patients into each treatment arm, which would produce a power of 80%  and detect an
improvement of 25 % in survival with the combined modality treatment at the a = 0.05 level
(two-sided test).  


The median follow-up time for the RT arm is 51 months (range, 34 to 67) and is 44 months  (range, 35
to 65) for the CT + RT.


Seven patients were not included in response assessment in the combined modality group, four
patients who died  of CT complications, two who died of metastatic disease, all of them before
commencement of RT, and one other patient whosepelvic disease progressed during CT and who received
palliative irradiation only because of poor general condition. 


This study was designed with the objective of answering the question of whether neoadjuvant BOMP
chemotherapy is effective in  stage III B carcinoma of the cervix. 


Although 25.5% of the patients achieved a CR following three cycles of BOMP and 47% of the CT + RT
group obtained a CR at the  end of RT, the 5-year overall survival was significantly inferior in the
CT + RT group than in the control arm (39% v 21%, P  = .02). It cannot be accounted for by patient 
selection as both groups were well balanced for the wellknown prognostic factors in stage III
carcinoma of the cervix.4'24-27  More importantly, all patients in the CT + RT arm completed pelvic
RT, as defined by the protocol guidelines, and therefore,  inadequate irradiation dosage cannot
explain the poorer results. 


Thus, a PR or even a CR could therefore  be of questionable value in determining therapeutic
effectiveness, as tumor masses would be still regressing while the  subclinical clonogenic cell
repopulation is accelerating. 


Another possible explanatory mechanism for our poorer results with the combined treatment modality
may be the development of  cross resistance between radiation and certain antineoplastic agents. The
mechanisms responsible for such cross-resistance  remain to be determined, but recent studies have
shown significant similarity between the cytotoxicity of irradiation and  alkylating agents and that
tumor cells may develop mechanisms of resistance capable of decreasing the cytotoxic effects of 
some antineoplastic drugs as well as radiation. 


None of the patients who  experienceddrug-induced pulmonary toxicity had any of the well-known risk
factors for development of bleomycin lung toxicity.  These authors treated 23 patients (20 cervical
cancer, two vulvar, one ovarian) and observed the  development of pulmonary toxicity in eight
patients (34.5%), with five of them dying a respiratory death while free of  disease. 


The high toxicity rate of BOMP CT, in the  dose and schedule used in this study, makes this
combination unacceptable for routine use. The  effectiveness of this approach will be evaluated in
the near future by a prospective and randomized phase III trial sponsored  by the National Cancer
Institute of Canada.
