

Pelvic lymph node metastases, for example have been known to decrease the 5-year survival from 82 to
90% in patients with negative nodes to 38 to 61% in patients with positive lymph nodes. An analysis
of data on 575 women enrolled in a previous Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) study of clinical and
pathologic predictors of surgically treated stage carcinoma of the cervix confirmed the roles of
LTD, DSI, and CLS as risk factors, increasing the probability of cancer recurrence at 3 years from 2
to 31%. 


In 1988 the GOG initiated a prospective randomized study (GOG #92), reported here, to investigate
the benefits and risks of adjuvant radiotherapy for Stage I cervical cancer patients treated by
conventional radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy and who were at high risk for
recurrence, because of LTD, DSI, CLS, but excluding patients with lymph node metastases.


The GOG #92 multicenter prospective randomized study was designed to determine whether postoperative
pelvic radiotherapy following radical hysterectomy and pelvic node dissection would reduce the rate
of recurrence and decrease the mortality in Stage IB cervical cancer patients with large tumor
diameter, deep stromal invasion by tumor, and presence of tumor in the capillary lymphatic spaces
found on microscopic examination. 


The study’s target sample size was set at 169 eligible patients based on a desire to detect a 55%
decrease in recurrence rate (exponential model with l 5 0.01 recurrences/month) with the use of
radiation therapy. The revised sample size goal was 260 patients and the final analysis of
recurrence-free interval would occur once 60 recurrences were observed. 


Patients were eligible for the study if they had primary Stage IB squamous, adenosquamous carcinoma,
or adenocarcinoma of cervix initially treated with a standard radical hysterectomy and who had
negative lymph nodes but one of the previously described combination of risk factors. Pelvic
lymphadenectomy required bilateral removal of all nodal tissue and skeletonization of all vessels
from the mid portion of the psoas muscle to uterer medially including the hypogastric artery and
vein and from the obturator fossa anterior to the obturator nerve. Other eligibility criteria for
enrollment into the study included normal blood counts, normal liver and kidney function, absence of
genitourinary tract abnormality as determined by intravenous pyelogram, renal sonogram, or
computerized tomography, and absence of intercurrent diseases or other conditions that might not
permit completion of the study or the required follow-up. 


The pelvic irradiation was given with a fourfield technique with a megavoltage beam, although
cobalt-60 was allowed if the SSD was greater than 80 cm. Radiation dose was from 46 Gy in 23
fractions to 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions, 5 fractions per week. 


Results of these tests as well as changes of therapy, adverse effects, progression, or death were
reported.


All histology slides were reviewed by two pathologists of the GOG Pathology Committee who measured
the depth of stromal invasion expressed in thirds of cervical thickness and ascertained the presence
or absence of the capillary lymphatic space tumor involvement and the tumor cell type. The
Radiotherapy Committee examined therapy forms, diagrams of irradiated fields, dosimetry curves, and
portal fields for each external field. 


Statistical Methods.Imbalances between patient and disease characteristics and treatment regimens
was accomplished using the Pearson’s x2 test. 


The median age at study entry was 41 (range, 20–80) and the 25th and 75th percentiles were 34 and
50, respectively. However, the overall risk for recurrence was very similar in each regimen when all
three risk factors were considered as a group (See Cox Model analyses).


Thirty-nine (27.9%) of the 140 women in the NFT group developed cancer recurrence, 27 (19.3%) local
(vagina or pelvis), and 10 (7.1%) distant. Eighty-six percent of patients have either died or have
been followed at least 3 years. 


In an attempt to evaluate the impact of this imbalance, the log–rank test was recalculated assuming
the first five patients lost (the excess number) in the RT group recurred at the time of their last
clinical evaluation. 


Both large tumor diameter and deep stromal invasion are indices of large tumor volume, conceivably
affecting cancer progression and its metastatic spread. 


Nevertheless, we found tumor diameter to be the most significant risk factors in the Cox model
analysis of our study results, confirming multiple data sets which demonstrate that the size of the
primary cancer is critical for local control despite the imprecision of measurement. 


We reanalyzed our results using the Cox model trying to simplify the formula or to use only a single
risk factor as a predictor. A detailed GOG clinical pathologic study had established that certain
patients with poor prognostic factors related to the primary tumor (i.e., large tumor size, deep
stromal invasion, and capillary lymphatic space tumor involvement) but without lymph node
involvement had a risk of recurrence of 31% after radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. 
The present prospective randomized study showed that adjunctive radiotherapy significantly reduced
the number of cancer recurrences in women with the above risk factors by 44% and that the difference
in recurrences between irradiated and nonirradiated patients was statistically significant at the P
5 0.019 level. It is conceivable that higher pelvic radiation doses could further reduce the pelvic
local failure rate. However, addition of vault brachytherapy is unlikely to improve the results
since there were only two isolated vault failures. One report showed that postoperative radiation
“prevented local recurrences and improved ten year tumor-free-survival” in a small number of women
with CLS, DSI, and microscopically involved lymph nodes. 


Since the node-negative group accounts for one-half of all Stage IB cervical cancer deaths adjuvant
radiotherapy for women with risk factors should substantially reduce the overall Stage IB mortality.
Increased morbidity in patients receiving full course radiotherapy following radical surgery for
cervical cancer has been reported. 
