

The nationwide use of such screening programs has greatly reduced the incidence of invasive cervical
cancer.


A previous study reported improved survival among women with locally advanced cervical cancer who
received prophylactic radiation to the para-aortic nodes. 


We report the first results of this study.


We enrolled women of all ages who had stages IIB through IVA squamous-cell carcinoma,
adenocarcinoma, or adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix according to the staging system of the
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (Table 1) or stage IB or IIA of one of these
cancers with a tumor diameter of at least 5 cm or biopsy-proved metastasis to pelvic lymph nodes. 
Women were excluded from the study if they met any of the following criteria, disease outside the
pelvic area or spread to para-aortic lymph nodes, a prior cancer other than cutaneous basal-cell
carcinoma, medical contraindications to chemotherapy, a rare histologic subtype, and prior
hysterectomy or transperitoneal staging procedure for cervical cancer, pelvic radiotherapy, or
systemic chemotherapy.


The patients in each treatment group were stratified according to the tumor stage (IB, IIA, or IIB
vs. III or IVA) and the staging method used for para-aortic lymph nodes (clinical vs. surgical).


For patients who were assigned to receive radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the treatment field
extended from the space between L4 and L5 to the midpubis or to a line 4 cm below the most distal
vaginal or cervical site of disease. 


The protocol specified that all patients receive a total cumulative dose to point A (a reference
location 2 cm lateral and 2 cmsuperior to the cervical os) of at least 85 Gy. 


Once treatment ended, patients were evaluated every three months for the first two years, every four
months during the third year, every six months during the fourth and fifth years, and then annually.
Disease status and the degree of treatment-related toxic effects were assessed by history taking,
physical examination, and appropriate laboratory and radiologic tests. 


Toxicity was assessed at the time of each evaluation with use of the Cooperative Group Common
Toxicity Criteria, the Acute Radiation Morbidity Scoring Criteria, and the Late Radiation Morbidity
Scoring Scheme of the RTOG and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer.


Overall survival was the primary end point for the comparison of the two treatments and was
calculated from the date of study entry until the date of death or the date of the last follow-up
visit. 


Five-year rates of secondary end points such as locoregional recurrence, para-aortic recurrence, and
distant metastasis were estimated with the use of cumulative-incidence methods,and treatment effects
were tested with use of the Gray algorithm. 


The nominal significance level required for early reporting was origioriginally set at P=0.005, but
we subsequently adopted a more conservative approach, because it allowed the number of deaths
observed to determine the nominal level required for early reporting. 


Fifteen patients (4 percent) — six in the combined-therapy group and nine in the radiotherapy group
— were subsequently disqualified because of failure to undergo the required evaluation of
para-aortic lymph nodes (eight patients), the presence of extrapelvic cancer (two), the presence of
a rare histologic subtype (one), the presence of a stage IB1 tumor with no involvement of pelvic
nodes (one), the absence of pretreatment data (two), and receipt of chemotherapy before radiotherapy
(one). 


Eleven patients (3 percent) did not undergo brachytherapy, three patients refused, and eight
patients did not undergo it for other reasons. The median total duration of radiation was 58 days,
with a mean dose of 89 Gy delivered to point A in each group. 


The relative likelihood of disease-free survival in the combined-therapy group, as compared with the
radiotherapy group, was 0.48 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.35 to 0.66). 


Although the group reported significant improvements in overall and disease-free survival with the
addition of hydroxyurea therapy, the study has been criticized for the use of a low dose of
radiation and the poor survival rates in both groups and because more than half of the 190 patients
who were enrolled could not be evaluated. The results of the Patterns of Care studies and large
retrospective analyses suggest that these features correlate with survival rates and rates of local
control of cervical cancer. 


In our study, the benefit of para-aortic radiation may have been less than that observed in an
earlier RTOG trial, because our trial required more rigorous staging of para-aortic lymph nodes and
included patients with more advanced pelvic disease. The acute side effects were severe, possibly
because of the addition of chemotherapy or the altered regimen of fractionation.
