

If it were assumed that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of their estrogen receptor (ER)
content, ie, composed of ER positive (ER +) and ER negative (ER -) cells in various proportions,
then they may have a differential response to endocrine and cytotoxic chemotherapy. 


A previous CALGB study demonstrated that the combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin
(Adriamycin, Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), vincristine, and prednisone
(CAFVP) or CAF were each superior to the widely used combination of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate,
and 5-FU (CMF). Tamoxifen was chosen as the hormonal agent because of its demonstrated efficacy in
postmenopausal women with breast cancer and its relative lack of toxicity. 


MATERIALS AND METHODSPatient EligibilityEligibility requirements for this study included
histologically documented carcinoma of the breast that was locally recurrent, metastatic or
surgically incurable (stage III or IV), measurable disease, a CALGB performance score of 3 or less,
and age < 75 years. Patients had to have a WBC count of > 4,000/pL, platelets > 100,000/L, a blood
urea nitrogen level of <20 mg/dL, serum creatinine of < 1.5 mg/dL, and normal values for SGOT and
bilirubin, unless abnormal values resulted from metastatic involvement. A history of myocardial
infarction within 6 months of protocol entry, congestive heart failure requiring digitalis, or
angina were all causes for exclusion. 


Stratification and RandomizationPatients were randomized from within 13 strata based on ER status
(negative, positive, or unknown), dominant site of disease (visceral or nonvisceral), prior adjuvant
chemotherapy or hormonal therapy, and menopausal status (pre- or postmenopausal) as follows, the
postmenopausal patients were divided into 12 strata based on the other three factors, and the
premenopausal patients were a single stratum (Table 1). 


Using the data of Hilf et al, values of > 7 fmol/mg/protein were considered positive, and <7
fmol/mg/ protein negative. 18 When no ER assay was performed, the patient was designated ER unknown.


Visceral metastases included disease in the liver, pulmonary parenchyma or pleura, brain, or bone
marrow. 


TreatmentAfter appropriate stratification, patients were randomized to receive either chemotherapy
or chemotherapy plus tamoxifen (Fig 1). Dose calculations were based on the patient's ideal body
weight or actualweight, whichever was lower. 


Reductions were also made for elevations of serum bilirubin and SGOT and for the occurrence of
stomatitis, diarrhea, or cystitis.


Response CriteriaA complete response (CR) required disappearance of all signs and symptoms
attributable to the tumor, including the disappearance of all lesions for at least 1 month. For bony
metastases, a PR meant partial recalcification of osteolytic lesions without the development of new
lesions. 


Progressive disease (PD) indicated the appearance of new lesions subsequently proven to be
metastases. 


Comparability of Groups (Patient Characteristics),Nonmeasurable DiseaseWhen compared with the 379
patients in the main analysis, the 26 patients with "bone-only" disease were more likely to have had
prior radiotherapy (50% v 29%, P = .03, chi square test). 


However, more of the bone-only patients achieved stable disease or subjective improvement, and none
had progression as the best response. 


The median duration of response in this study was 12.0 months (Fig 4). 


When the 190 evaluable patients receiving CAF were analyzed by ER status (Table 7), there was no
significant difference in response rate between ER + and ER - tumors (56%). 


There were three early deaths and one patient had treatment withheld after a hip fracture. Both
programs produced equivalent incidences of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, nausea and vomiting, and
infection. The other lethal toxicity was congestive heart failure.  


Our ER + and ER - cases had identical response rates (56%) to chemotherapy (CAF), but ER + patients
had significantly longer response durations (P = .00015), TTF (P = .0061), and survival (P = .0058)
than ER- patients (Fig 5).


Combining chemotherapy with hormonal therapy is not a new idea, the first clinical trials were
reported over 15 years ago. 


More recent trials such as that reported by Cocconi et al and Viladiu et al seemed to show some
benefit in response rate to combined chemohormonal therapy, but in neither trial was a survival
advantage confirmed. Krook et al were unable to demonstrate that the addition of tamoxifen to CFP
(cyclophosphamide + 5-FU + prednisone) improved time to disease progression or survival over
treatment with CFP alone. 


Lastly, Kiang et al randomized 40 ER + postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer to estrogen
therapywith diethylstilbesterol (DES) or DES + chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and 5-FU (CF). 


Serial bone scans may be helpful, but bone scans improve slowly, thus rendering this technique of
greater value in documenting treatment failure rather than response. Pain "flares" are sometimes
seen with successful hormonal or chemotherapy but Coombes et al" found that pain relief was the most
consistent index of response to treatment, since nearly all responding patients with bone metastases
eventually became pain free.


If there is an increase in pain, or pain in a new site, the patient is probably a treatment failure,
and objective criteria should be sought. 
